Earlier I mentioned how a consulting business can be useful for getting the resources and feedback neccisary to build your initial product. Now I want to talk about when it is time to shift your consulting client into your product customers.

Let me explain this by telling you a little story about my past. When I was building Schematical.com the Facebook Application soluiton I was consulting with one of the worlds biggest online gaming sites of its type, it was a one word .com so pretty big. I had created a simple process and hired 3 part time developers and an assistant to manage them. My profit margin was pretty good and I was using the proceeds to pay for my salary and the development of Schematical's Facebook project. The problem was it was 100% of our revinue at the time. 

Expecting this contract to continue as originally agreed I signed some contract getting us additional resources. This overhead wasn't a problem as we had this income coming in from the one big client, or so I thought. The client ended up pulling a fast one and refusing to pay four weeks worth of invoices. This means I had to cover my employees and their leighbor for the client out of pocket. This cash flow nightmare almost killed us. 

###The book: Built to sell
Luckily around this time I was reading a book called [Built to Sell by John Warrillow](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1591845823/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1591845823&linkCode=as2&tag=ride2shootcom-20&linkId=M6RYISBRX5W4GOTI) (More like "Built to save my ass"). In this book John talks about what a death trap it is to have the majority of your revinue from one client. He recomends distributing it between multiple clients. If you have one primary client then you don't have a company, you have a job... This was my mistake and it almost ended Schematical.

###Customers buy a packaged product:
As I started to pick up the peaces from this at the time monumential financial fiascio I started to implement several of John's tatics. These same tatics can take you from the consulting pratice with a few clients to a scalable product shipping machine. Here are some of the steps I did to turn my consulting business into packaged product business.

####Figure out what your best at:
Examine what value your top clients recive from you and see if there are any commonalities. In my mid twenties I had made a name for myself with 6 of the top agencies in Chicago building high profile Facebook apps quickly and underbudget.

####Figure out what pays the majority of your bills for the least amount of resources:
Since I had been building the Schematical Facebook Application I found I could use that to pump out Facebook Apps with extream effency(Despite the fact it wasnt selling and never really would). 

####Figure out what you want to do:
I knew I enjoyed building Facebook apps, exspecially the high profile ones. I knew I didn't want to sit around hageling and negotiating each deal as that was time intensive just for small potatoes.

###Packaging Services:
Building a Facebook app is still technically a service. Whatever service your consulting pratice offers is still a service untill you package it in to a deleverable value. My product then becomes the deleverable of a **Custom Facebook App* not my time which is not scalable. I had to own the process in order for this to work.

###Owning the process:
When you consult one of three things happens:

####The client owns the process:
This is most common when working with goverment or big coporate entities. A client might say we need 3 developers for a 90 day contract and we are willing to pay this. They prepair the paperwork set the terms and you as the consultant have no say in any of it. So if there is any gray area you better belive the terms will be in their favor. Not my ideal working situation.


####No one owns the process:

This means both you and the client make it up as you go along. Here is an example from the tech startup game: Someone has an idea and hires a developer, designer, marketer, etc to build and ship product X. The problem is that unless the client is a veteraned entripinure they dont know what they want. "Wait you mean developers don't do design?" or "You mean your just going to build it, you don't have a plan to sell it?". This is an aquward clumbsy process that often ends badly.

####You own the process:
This is what I find works best for you the consultant, scratch that, the business owner. You create an offer, set the price, develery date, and scope. I set it up so that I would deliver a fully functional Facebook contest application in 5 business days for a flat cost of $3500. 

###Advantages:

####You set the terms:
I don't know how to express how important this is to you. You decide when, what, how and how much. This is like a warm blanket. I strongly suggest you be as simple and transparent as possible with your terms as possible for both parties. Don't hide stuff in the fine print. If you find your self setting a term that no one will agree with unless it is hidden in the fine print then you probablly will need to adjust your terms or find a different model. (Basically don't be a tool).

####Specilization:
By specializing in one specific area you can cut the overhead that would be required to be more of a generalist and focus your time and resources on becoming more effecent at one specific area. I could hammer out a fully functional custom designed Facebook contest in about 4 hours(Talk about a 4 hour work week).

####No more window shoping:
Another big advantage to owning the process is you can eliminate the need for costly sales and estimation processes. Often times in consulting the client will get a couple of estimates. Sometimes they will get an estimate from you with no intention to buy from you, just to put together a budget or to drive a competitive offer down. This significantly drives up the costs associated with the consultant's sales and estimation process. 

The good news is by owning the process you can get rid of these pains. I set it up so anyone could go to my website and check out my prices and test an example site that showed exactly what functionality they would be getting. They could then, for free, download a PSD template that matched my example site that they could then customize. Keep in mind they could do all of this with out even wasting a second of my time. This made my sales/estimation process painless for both parties.

####Pricing:
What if I do custom work and there are a lot of variables? 

#####One price fits all:
This hugly depends on your margins, if you feel confidant that any and all customizations allowed by your terms will not kill your margins then you can do this. 

#####Al acart:
Any customizations should be simple enough you can create a simple checklist(you know I love checklists) that the client can fill out and figure out what the adjusted cost will be. Keep it simple. Remember not everyone understands complex Dungon and Dragon type math.


#####Customizations at a cost:
You may consider setting terms that allow for additional customizations at an additional rate, but I would be hesitant to create an indepth estimate or any estimate before the product was purchased, cash in your hand. Remember the estimation process costs money. If the client is  pushy about getting an estimate without cash in hand don't allow your time to be wasted. I would recomend doing a quick estimate with a lot of margin built in just to be safe... a lot of margin.

###Get paid up front and deliver:
Finally I strongly recomend you start getting paid up front for your work. This eliminates the chance that someone might pull the same dirty tricks they did on me to you. The thing about getting paid up front is that **you have to deliver**. That money in the bank is not yours to keep unless you deliver. Be prepaired to offer a 100% money back guerentee when you start taking payment up front.

####Protecting yourself:
Now if you do deliver exactly what your terms state you will and the customer still want's 100% of their money back this can be a tricky situation. In the programming world I hold on to the source code or I host the code myself tuntil the customer confirms that they are satisfied with the work and will not be requiring a refund. Basically be honest and transparent and only do business with those you belive are honest and transparent as well. Owning the process should make this as easy.

###Scaling the processes:
We will talk more about this in upcoming sections. For now understand if you truely want to free your self from being trapped by your business and run the business you will need to be able to replace yourself at every point in the process. 

###Conclustion:
For a more indepth look at shifting from a consulting pratice to a scalable product driven business check out the book [Built to Sell by John Warrillow](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1591845823/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1591845823&linkCode=as2&tag=ride2shootcom-20&linkId=M6RYISBRX5W4GOTI).

