This section talks about some simple things you can do with the code at this stage to ensure you can scale easier when you are ready for the following stage. 
 
Enumerate:
Enumeration, in code, is defining a value using it by reference only throughout the  rest of the app. 

Configuration:
The most common and obviously valuable use of this is in the configuration of an app or its environment. Lets look at what happens if you don’t use enumeration.

Lets say you have an alpha server whos URL is http://alpha.myapp.com and you hardcode  that all over your app. Hardcode means actually retyping or copying and pasteing “http://alpha.myapp.com” all over the app every time you want to call out to the server for a style sheet or a javascript file or an image. Now when its time to roll your app to the beta environment you need to go through the entire thing and change each and every place this url is typed. This is obviously time consuming and inefficient. What happens if you miss a URL? The app will break.

Now instead lets try the same thing with enumeration:

This time we create a configuration file. That intelligently figures out which environment it is in and their fore what the variable ‘ROOT_URL’ is. From here we code all of our references to the root url to pull from this variable.


Localization:
Localization uses the same value reference to translate apps in to other local languages. For example you would have a file that knows the word user in spanish is “el usuario”. When the app boots up it would check the language setting to define certain values such as the term for “user” and so on. Everytime you use a word or phrase in that list you would reference what was defined during the boot up and the app would appear to be written in that native language.


At an early stage unless this is key to your early stage business model I wouldn’t bother with localization. We are still figuring out what the users want.

Encapsulate:


Follow your F#%$ing naming conventions!



